I'm aware of "impossible possible worlds", but as far as I can tell, there hasn't been much work done in that direction beyond setting up some formalism. It doesn't seem to offer any insight into how informal mathematical reasoning actually works (i.e., how we come to believe some unproved mathematical conjectures but not others).

Another direction, taken by Marcus Hutter's AIXI-tl and Schmidhuber's Godel Machine, is to essentially hard wire difficult-to-prove/unprovable mathematical conjectures into the AI as unchangeable assumptions. This may not be obvious at first glance so I'll explain. The way those AIs work is to start with an initial policy (handcrafted program for making decisions) and then systematically search for provable improvements to the policy. The initial policy necessarily makes implicit or explicit assumptions about the truth value of mathematical conjectures. Such an assumption can't be changed unless it can be proved to be false, otherwise it's impossible to prove that changing it won't lower expected utility.

I'm curious what others think about how important this problem is. I know that in my own field of cryptography, heavy use is made of informal mathematical reasoning, since it has not be possible to invent ciphers that can be proven to be computationally hard to break (this would require P!=NP at a minimum). Likewise in cryptanalysis, many important algorithms can not be proven to be correct and/or only have heuristic running times.

One might argue that the problem isn't important, because an AI with much greater computational resources than we do will be able to easily prove or disprove any mathematical conjectures that might be practically relevant. But it's not obvious this will be the case. Gregory Chaitin has argued that many interesting or natural mathematical questions may be independent of the usual axioms. He advocates that mathematics should be "quasi-empirical" and done more like physics. I think this is already the case to a great extent, especially in applied math, but we don't seem to know how to formalize the process so an AI can also do this.