An attack against SSH2 protocol

Phil Rogaway observed that CBC mode is not secure against chosen-plaintext attack if the IV is known or can be predicted by the attacker before he choses his plaintext [1]. Similarly, CBC mode is not secure if  the attacker can observe the last ciphertext block before choosing the  next block of plaintext, because the last block of ciphertext  essentially serves as the IV for the rest of the message. 

The attack itself is very simple. Remember that in CBC mode, each  plaintext block is XOR'ed with the last ciphertext block and then  encrypted to produce the next ciphertext block. Suppose the attacker  suspects that plaintext block P_i might be x, and wants to test whether  that's the case, he would choose the next plaintext block P_j to be x  XOR C_(i-1) XOR C_(j-1). If his guess is correct, then C_j = Encrypt(P_j  XOR C_(j-1)) = Encrypt(P_i XOR C_(i-1)) = C_i, and so he can confirm his  guess by looking at whether C_j = C_i.

The SSH2 protocol, when used with a block cipher in CBC mode, does allow  the attacker to observe the last ciphertext block of a packet, which is  then used as the (implicit) IV of the next packet. SSH2 also multiplexes  multiple channels into one transport stream encrypted with a single key.  This gives the attacker who can input data into one channel a chance to  attack other channels. (Another possible attack scenario is a multi-user  chat session.) Fortunately, the attacker may not have complete freedom  to choose the first block of the plaintext of the next packet. For  example, the first 4 bytes of the plaintext of any packet consist of the  packet length. Assuming that the SSH2 application has a maximum packet  size of 2^16, the attacker is constrained to choosing a plaintext block  that begins with two zero octects. This implies that the attacker would  have to wait at least 2^16 packets on average before he has a chance to  perform this attack. 

However even with this and other potential constraints it seems very  possible for the attacker to succeed in some situations. So I suggest  that the SSH2 protocol be fixed. The simplest way to do this would be to  deprecate the CBC mode block ciphers, and instead specify ciphers in  CFB, CTR or OFB mode. Currently, the only cipher defined in the SSH2  transport protocol draft that is not a block cipher in CBC mode is ARC4.  Until this fix is implemented, users of SSH2 applications may want to  consider switching to ARC4 for encryption.