Lucas Sequences in Cryptography

This is a short note on the practical usefulness of Lucas sequences in applied cryptography. A Lucas sequence is a sequence of integers characterized by two parameters, P and Q. In practice Q is always 1 and the sequence is taken modulo a large integer. Calculating an element of a Lucas sequence is very similar to exponentiation. It may be helpful to think of P as the base and the index as the exponent. The following algorithm calculates V_e(p, 1) mod n, i.e., the e-th element of the Lucas sequence mod n characterized by P=p and Q=1. It uses m modular multiplies and m modular squarings, where m is the bit length of e. Therefore, it's about twice as slow as a modular exponentiation to the power e mod n.

One application for Lucas sequences is primality testing. A theorem similar to Fermat's Little Theorem states that if n is prime and Jacobi(P^2-4, n)==-1, then V_n+1(P, 1) mod n == 2. The following algorithm uses this theorem as a probable primality test. A combination of this test and the strong probable prime test to the base 2 is extremely fast and reliable. In fact no composite number is known to pass both tests, and the total amount of time for the combined test is no more than 3 modular exponentiations.

Lucas sequences can also be used for public key crypto and signature systems in a manner similar to RSA, but using Lucas sequences modulo a composite number instead of exponentiation. It has roughly the same security as RSA for the same size key, but is about twice as slow. Lucas sequence analogues of Diffie-Hellman and ElGamal can also be constructed. Compared to DH and ElGamal, for the same level of security they only require modulus half the size because their security is based on discrete log in GF(p^2) rather than GF(p). Because of the smaller modulus used and depending on your modular multiplication algorithm, they are also 50 to 100 percent faster. For more details, see the Crypto 95 paper "Some Remarks on Lucas-Based Cryptosystems" by Bleichenbacher, Bosman, and Lenstra.

