Two attacks

Attack 1

Although the ZKS Freedom AIP protocol (as described in version 1.0 of the ZKS whitepaper) is conceptually similar to the PipeNet protocol, there are several attacks against ZKS which PipeNet is not susceptible to. The reason is that PipeNet uses end-to-end traffic padding, whereas ZKS only uses link padding. I came up with several attacks against link padding systems while developing PipeNet, which is why I ultimately choose end-to-end padding. However one can argue that end-to-end padding is too costly, and that these attacks are not practical because they require a global observer or the cooperation of one or more of the anonymous router (AIP) operators. ZKS has not publicly made this argument, but since they are probably aware of these earlier attacks they must have followed its reasoning.

I hope the practicality of the new attack presented here will change their mind. In this attack, a user creates an anonymous route from himself through a pair of AIPs back to himself. He then increases the traffic through this route until total traffic between the pair of AIPs reach the bandwidth limit set by the ZKS Traffic Shaper. At this point the AIPs no longer send any padding packets to each other, and the real traffic throughput between them can be deduced by subtracting the traffic sent by the attacker from the bandwidth limit.

This attack implies that link padding buys virtually no security. An attacker, without access to network sniffers or cooperation of any AIP operator, can strip off link padding and obtain real-time throughput data between all pairs of AIPs. If end-to-end padding is not used, this data would correlate with traffic throughput of individual users, and statistical analysis could then reveal their supposedly anonymous routes.

Attack 2

[Based on the draft Freedom white papers as of 11/23/1999.]

This attack allows a pair of AIPs in collusion to trace everyone who use them as first and last AIPs, thus bypassing the security of the middle ones. It's possible because a data packet is MAC'd only between the client and the last AIP. This is an active attack but it's not clear whether it's detectable because what the AIP does when the MAC check fails is not specified. At this point it has limited practical significance since the lack of cover traffic allows the pair of AIPs to mount a passive timing-correlation attack.

The attack works as follows. The first AIP chooses a target client and records its IP address. When it receives a packet from the client it randomly mangles the payload section and send the packet out in both mangled and unmangled form. (The attack only requires the mangled packet, the unmangled one is to help avoid detection of the attack.) The last AIP watches its input to see if a packet comes in that fails the MAC check. If so it knows the IP address of the pseudonym associated with the ACI (anonymous circuit id) of the packet.

In PipeNet, this attack is avoided because there is a MAC for each switch in the chain, so if the first switch mangles a packet, the second switch would immediately detect this and stop forwarding the packet. Actually the original PipeNet design had a similar problem but this was announced on cypherpunks and fixed in PipeNet version 1.1.