Outline of possible Singularity scenarios (that are not completely disastrous)

Suppose we could look into the future of our Everett branch and pick out those sub-branches in which humanity and/or human/moral values have survived past the Singularity in some form. What would we see if we then went backwards in time and look at how that happened? Here's an attempt to answer that question, or in other words to enumerate the not completely disastrous Singularity scenarios that seem to have non-negligible probability. Note that the question I'm asking here is distinct from "In what direction should we try to nudge the future?" (which I think logically ought to come second).

Uploading first
Become superintelligent (self-modify or build FAI), then take over the world
Take over the world as a superorganism
self-modify or build FAI at leisure
(Added) stasis
Competitive upload scenario
(Added) subsequent singleton formation
(Added) subsequent AGI intelligence explosion
no singleton
IA (intelligence amplification) first
Clone a million von Neumanns (probably government project)
Gradual genetic enhancement of offspring (probably market-based)
Pharmaceutical
Direct brain/computer interface
What happens next? Upload or code?
Code (de novo AI) first
Scale of project
International
National
Large Corporation
Small Organization
Secrecy - spectrum between
totally open
totally secret
Planned Friendliness vs "emergent" non-catastrophe
If planned, what approach?
"Normative" - define decision process and utility function manually
"Meta-ethical" - e.g., CEV
"Meta-philosophical" - program AI how to do philosophy
If emergent, why?
Objective morality
Convergent evolution of values
Acausal game theory
Standard game theory (e.g., Robin's idea that AIs in a competitive scenario will respect human property rights due to standard game theoretic considerations)
Competitive vs. local FOOM
(Added) Simultaneous/complementary development of IA and AI
Sorry if this is too cryptic or compressed. I'm writing this mostly for my own future reference, but perhaps it could be expanded more if there is interest. And of course I'd welcome any scenarios that may be missing from this list.