I've read that paper, but my question is different from the one he addresses. Bostrom focuses on the possibility that we're living in an ancester-simulation run by posthumans. This doesn't really apply to an SI, who I think would be much more interested in the possibility that it's living in a universe simulation running in a computationally much richer base reality.

Of course some of the reasoning Bostrom uses applies to this case, but we also need something that he doesn't address: a prior distribution on the laws of physics of base reality. He doesn't have to address it because he assumes that the laws of physics of base reality are the laws that we observe, and the only question is whether we're living in an ancestor-simulation or not.

One appealing answer to this question of the prior is to define the prior probability of a possible universe being base reality as the inverse of the complexity of its laws of physics. This could be formalized as P(X) = n^-K(X) where X is a possible universe, n is the size of the alphabet of the language of a formal set theory, and K(X) is length of the shortest definition in this language of a set isomorphic to X. (Those of you familiar with algorithmic complexity theory might notice that K(X) is just a generalization of algorithmic complexity, to sets, and to non-constructive descriptions. The reason for this generalization is to avoid assuming that base reality must be discrete and computable.)

That still leaves the question: which set theory? This is analagous to the question in algorithmic complexity theory of which universal Turing machine do we use to define algorithmic complexity? Algorithmic complexity theorists have ignored the question (because they can obtain asymptotic results without having to define a particular Turing machine) so they're not of much help to us on this point.

The lack of a objective criteria for choosing a formal set theory for this purpose leads me to wonder if perhaps the choice of a prior is a subjective one, similar to the "choice" of a supergoal in the presumed absence of objective morality. In case it is, shouldn't we try to answer this question before building an SI?